Email validation synthetics guide (#7794)
DataDog/documentation: content/en/synthetics/guide/email-validation.md

---
title: Email Validation with Browser Tests
kind: documentation
description: Verify an email and its content with browser test steps
further_reading:
- link: "//synthetics/browser_tests/actions"
  tag: "Documentation"
  text: "Learn about steps for browser tests"
- link: "/synthetics/browser_tests/advanced_options/"
  tag: "Documentation"
  text: "Configure advanced options for steps"
---

> ## Overview

Reviewer: Can we add an `Overview` section to the other guides for homogeneity or remove it from that one?

> Classic web application journeys often involve emails being triggered and sent to a users’ mailbox: Email verification after account creation, email sent to reset forgotten passwords, order confirmations, mail confirmation after contact form submission, etc.

Author: ```suggestion
Classic web application journeys often involve emails being triggered and sent to a users’ mailbox: email verification after account creation, email sent to reset forgotten passwords, order confirmations, mail confirmation after contact form submission, etc.
```

Making sure your application’s email mechanisms are working as expected is key to ensuring a great user experience on your website.

Datadog Browser Tests allow you to:

- Confirm an email was correctly sent following up on an in-app trigger

> - Check its content

Author: ```suggestion
- Check an email's content
```

- Click on the links located within the sent emails in order to navigate to other URLs and validate your whole flows, including web and email steps

To perform email validation inside a Datadog Browser test:

## Create an email variable

> After creating your browser test, navigate to **Edit Recording**, select **Variables** and then select **Email** from the email variable dropdown list:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After filling your Browser test details (start URL, devices, locations, frequency, notification), navigate to **Save Details & Record Test**, select **Variables** and then select **Email** from the email variable dropdown list:
```

{{< img src="synthetics/guide/email-validation/adding-variable.mp4" alt="Create an email variable" video="true"  width="100%">}}

In the above example, an email variable called `EMAIL` is created. The newly created email variable generates a unique mailbox maintained by Datadog at every test execution. This is key to avoid any conflicts among your Browser test runs.

## Record steps

> In the upper left corner of the UI, hit the **Start Recording** button and record the steps leading to the email being triggered using your freshly created email variable. Use the hand icon to record these steps.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the upper left corner of the UI, hit the **Start Recording** button and record the steps leading to the email being triggered using your freshly created email variable. Use the hand icon to input variables in the form text inputs.
```

{{< img src="synthetics/guide/email-validation/record-steps.mp4" alt="Record your steps" video="true"  width="100%">}}

The steps to fill the form are recorded and the click on the `Sign up` button triggers the email. An email is sent to the Datadog mailbox that was created for this recording session as a result (for example, `838-n3q-q2y.6238933596@synthetics.dtdg.co` in this example).

## Confirm the email was sent

You can now confirm that an email was sent. Click the **Assertion** button and select the `Test that an email was received` assertion.

{{< img src="synthetics/guide/email-validation/assertion-step.mp4" alt="Add an assertion" video="true"  width="100%">}}

If you want to make sure your email respects specific guidelines for its content, you can add more verifications against its subject and body.

> In the above example, the assertion is set to be successful if the email subject is `Welcome to Shopist!` and if its body contains the sentence `Your verification code is` and a verification code matches the `\d{1,6}` regex pattern.

Reviewer: Link to https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Guide/Regular_Expressions
